# The Energies of Men 



By WILLIAM JAMES 

PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY, HARVARD UNIVERSITY 



A Neiv Edition 



NEW YORK 

MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY 

1914 



Copyright 1907, bt 
THE AMERICAN MAGAZINE 

Reprinted by Permission 

<hr/>


## INTRODUCTORY. 

**THOUGH** it would seem that the sane and simple message of this essay could
not be misconstrued, the fact that it has been wholly misunderstood in
newspaper comment warns us that it is necessary to preface it by stating that
it does not counsel all persons to drive themselves at all times beyond the
limits of ordinary endurance, that it is not a gospel of overstrain nor an
advocate of the use of alcohol and opium as stimulants in emergencies.


It states that "second wind" is a reality in the mental as in the physical
realm and that it can be found and used when needed — nothing more.



# The Energies of Men 

**EVERYONE** knows what it is to start a piece of work, either intellectual or
muscular, feeling stale — or oold, as an Adirondack guide once put it to me.
And everybody knows what it is to " warm up" to his job. The process of
warming up gets particularly striking in the phenomenon known as "second
wind." On usual occasions we make a practice of stopping an occupation as soon
as we meet the first effective layer (so to call it) of fatigue. We have then
walked, played, or worked " enough," so we desist. That amount of fatigue is
an efficacious obstruction on this side of which our usual life is cast. But
if an unusual necessity forces us to press onward, a surprising thing occurs.
The fatigue gets worse up to a certain critical point, when gradually or
suddenly it passes away, and we are fresher than before. We have evidently
tapped a level of new energy, masked until then by the fatigue-obstacle
usually obeyed. There may be layer after layer of this experience. A third and
a fourth "wind" may supervene. Mental activity shows the phenomenon as well as
physical, and in exceptional cases we may find, beyond the very extremity of
fatigue-distress, amounts of ease and power that we never dreamed ourselves to
own, — sources of strength habitually not taxed at all, because habitually we
never push through the obstruction, never pass those early critical points.

## Getting One's Second Wind. 

For many years I have mused on the phenomenon of second wind, trying to find a
physiological theory. It is evident that our organism has stored-up reserves
of energy that are ordinarily not called upon, but that may be called upon:
deeper and deeper strata of combustible or explosible material,
discontinuously arranged, but ready for use by anyone who probes so deep, and
repairing themselves by rest as well as do the superficial strata. Most of us
continue living unnecessarily near our surface. Our energy-budget is like our
nutritive budget. Physiologists say that a man is in "nutritive equilibrium"
when day after day he neither gains nor loses weight. But the odd thing is
that this condition may obtain on astonishingly different amounts of food.
Take a man in nutritive equilibrium, and systematically increase or lessen his
rations. In the first case he will begin to gain weight, in the second case to
lose it. The change will be greatest on the first day, less on the second,
less still on the third; and so on, till he has gained all that he will gain,
or lost all that he will lose, on that altered diet. He is now in nutritive
equilibrium again, but with a new weight; and this neither lessens nor
increases because his various combustion-processes have adjusted themselves to
the changed dietary. He gets rid, in one way or another, of just as much N, C,
H, etc., as he takes in _per die  m_.

Just so one can be in what I might call "efficiency-equilibrium" (neither
gaining nor losing power when once the equilibrium is reached) on
astonishingly different quantities of work, no matter in what direction the
work may be meas- ured. It may be physical work, intellectual work, moral
work, or spiritual work.

## Keeping Up a Faster Pace. 

Of course there are limits: the trees don't grow into the sky. But the plain
fact remains that men the world over possess amounts of resource which only
very exceptional individuals push to their extremes of use. But the very same
individual, pushing his energies to their extreme, may in a vast number of
cases keep the pace up day after day, and find no "reaction" of a bad sort, so
long as decent hygienic conditions are preserved. His more active rate of
energizing does not wreck him; for the organism adapts itself, and as the rate
of waste augments, augments correspondingly the rate of repair.

I say the _rate_ and not the _time_ of repair. The busiest man needs no more
hours of rest than the idler. Some years ago Professor Patrick, of the Iowa
State University, kept three young men awake for four days and nights. When
his observations on them were finished, the subjects were permitted to sleep
themselves out. All awoke from this sleep completely refreshed, but the one
who took longest to restore himself from his long vigil only slept one-third
more time than was regular with him.

If my reader will put together these two conceptions, first, that few men live
at their maximum of energy, and second, that anyone may be in vital
equilibrium at very different rates of energizing, he will find, I think, that
a very pretty practical problem of national economy, as well as of individual
ethics, opens upon his view. In rough terms, we may say that a man who
energizes below his normal maximum fails by just so much to profit by his
chance at life; and that a nation filled with such men is inferior to a nation
run at higher pressure. The problem is, then, how can men be trained up to
their most useful pitch of energy? And how can nations make such training most
accessible to all their sons and daughters. This, after all, is only the
general problem of education, formulated in slightly different terms.

"Rough" terms, I said just now, because the words "energy" and "maximum" may
easily suggest only _quantity_ to the reader's mind, whereas in measuring the
human energies of which I speak, qualities as well as quantities have to be
taken into account. Everyone feels that his total _power_ rises when he passes
to a higher _qualitative_ level of life.

## Saying "Yes" and Saying "No" 

Writing is higher than walking, thinking is higher than writing, deciding
higher than thinking, deciding "no" higher than deciding "yes" — at least the
man who passes from one of these activities to another will usually say that
each later one involves a greater element of _inner work_ than the earlier ones,
even though the total heat given out or the footpounds expended by the
organism, may be less. Just how to conceive this inner work physiologically is
as yet impossible, but psychologically we all know what the word means. We
need a particular spur or effort to start us upon inner work; it tires us to
sustain it; and when long sustained, we know how easily we lapse. When I speak
of "energizing," and its rates and levels and sources, I mean therefore our
inner as well as our outer work.

## Saying "Peace! Be Still" 

Let no one think, then, that our problem of individual and national economy is
solely that of the maximum of pounds raisable against gravity, the maximum of
locomotion, or of agitation of any sort, that human beings can accomplish.
That might signify little more than hurrying and jumping about in
inco-ordinated ways; whereas inner work, though it so often reinforces outer
work, quite as often means its arrest. To relax, to say to ourselves (with the
"new thoughters") "Peace! be still!" is sometimes a great achievement of inner
work. When I speak of human energizing in general, the reader must therefore
understand that sum- total of activities, some outer and some inner, some
muscular, some emotional, some moral, some spiritual, of whose waxing and
waning in himself he is at all times so well aware. How to keep it at an
appreciable maximum? How not to let the level lapse? That is the great
problem. But the work of men and women is of innumerable kinds, each kind
being, as we say, carried on by a particular faculty; so the great problem
splits into two subproblems, thus:

(1.) What are the limits of human faculty in various directions ? 

(2.) By what diversity of means, in the differing types of human beings, may 
the faculties be stimulated to their best results ? 

Read in one way, these two questions sound both trivial and familiar: there is
a sense in which we have all asked them ever since we were born. Yet _as a
methodical programme of scientific inquiry_, I doubt whether they have ever
been seriously taken up. If answered fully, almost the whole of mental science
and of the science of conduct would find a place under them. I propose, in
what follows, to press them on the reader's attention in an informal way.

## Failing to Do All that We Can. 

The first point to agree upon in this enterprise is that _as a rule men
habitually use only a small part of the powers which they actually possess and
which they might use under appropriate conditions_.

Every one is familiar with the phenomenon of feeling more or less alive on
different days. Every one knows on any given day that there are energies
slumbering in him which the incitements of that day do not call forth, but
which he might display if these were greater. Most of us feel as if a sort of
cloud weighed upon us, keeping us below our highest notch of clearness in
discernment, sureness in reasoning, or firmness in deciding. Compared with
what we ought to be, we are only half awake. Our fires are damped, our drafts
are checked. We are making use of only a small part of our possible mental and
physical resources. In some persons this sense of being cut off from their
rightful resources is extreme, and we then get the formidable neurasthenic and
psychasthenic conditions, with life grown into one tissue of impossibilities,
that so many medical books describe.

Stating the thing broadly, the human individual thus lives usually far within
his limits; he possesses powers of various sorts which he habitually fails to
use. He energizes below his _maximum_, and he behaves below his _optimum_. In
elementary faculty, in co-ordination, in power of _inhibition_ and control, in
every conceivable way, his life is contracted like the field of vision of an
hysteric subject — but with less excuse, for the poor hysteric is diseased,
while in the rest of us it is only an inveterate habit — the _habit_ of
inferiority to our full self — that is bad.

## Going Over the Dam. 

Admit so much, then, and admit also that the charge of being inferior to their
full self is far truer of some men than of others; then the practical question
ensues: _to what do the better men owe their escape? and, in the fluctuations
which all men feel in their own degree of energizing, to what are the
improvements due, when they occur?_

In general terms the answer is plain: 

Either some unusual stimulus fills them with emotional excitement, or some
unusual idea of necessity induces them to make an extra effort of will.
_Excitements, ideas, and efforts,_ in a word, are what carry us over the dam.

In those "hyperesthetic" conditions which chronic invalidism so often brings in
its train, the dam has changed its normal place. The slightest functional
exercise gives a distress which the patient yields to and stops. In such cases
of "habit-neurosis" a new range of power often comes in consequence of the
"bullying-treatment," of efforts which the doctor obliges the patient, much
against his will, to make. First comes the very extremity of distress, then
follows unexpected relief. There seems no doubt that _we are each and all of
us to some extent victims of habit-neurosis._ We have to admit the wider
potential range and the habitually narrow actual use. We live subject to
arrest by degrees of fatigue which we have come only from habit to obey. Most
of us may learn to push the barrier farther off, and to live in perfect
comfort on much higher levels of power.

## The Energies of Roosevelt. 

Country people and city people, as a class, illustrate this difference. The
rapid rate of life, the number of decisions in an hour, the many things to
keep account of, in a busy city man's or woman's life, seem monstrous to a
country brother. He doesn't see how we live at all. A day in New York or
Chicago fills him with terror. The danger and noise make it appear like a
permanent earthquake. But _settle_ him there, and in a year or two he will have
caught the pulse-beat. He will vibrate to the city's rhythms; and if he only
succeeds in his avocation, whatever that may be, he will find a joy in all the
hurry and the tension, he will keep the pace as well as any of us, and get as
much out of himself in any week as he ever did in ten weeks in the country.


The stimuli of those who successfully respond and undergo the transformation
here, are duty, the example of others, and crowd-pressure and contagion. The
transformation, moreover, is a chronic one: the new level of energy becomes
permanent. The duties of new offices of trust are constantly producing this
effect on the human beings appointed to them. The physiologists call a
stimulus "dynamogenic" when it increases the muscular contractions of men to
whom it is applied; but appeals can be dynamogenic morally as well as
muscularly. We are witnessing here in America to-day the dynamogenic effect of
a very exalted political office upon the energies of an individual who had
already manifested a healthy amount of energy before the office came.


## The Sublime Heroism of Women. 

Humbler examples show perhaps still better what chronic effects duty's appeal
may produce in chosen individuals. John Stuart Mill somewhere says that women
excel men in the power of keeping up sustained moral excitement. Every case of
illness nursed by wife or mother is a proof of this; and where can one find
greater examples of sustained endurance than in those thousands of poor homes,
where the woman successfully holds the family together and keeps it going by
taking all the thought and doing all the work — nursing, teaching, cooking,
washing, sewing, scrubbing, saving, helping neighbors, "choring" outside —
where does the catalogue end? If she does a bit of scolding now and then who
can blame her? But often she does just the reverse; keeping the children clean
and the man good tempered, and soothing and smoothing the whole neighborhood
into finer shape.

Eighty years ago a certain Montyon left to the Academie Francaise a sum of
money to be given in small prizes, to the best examples of "virtue" of the
year. The academy's committees, with great good sense, have shown a partiality
to virtues simple and chronic, rather than to her spasmodic and dramatic
flights; and the exemplary housewives reported on have been wonderful and
admirable enough. In Paul Bour get's report for this year we find numerous
cases, of which this is a type; Jeanne Chaix, eldest of six children; mother
insane, father chronically ill. Jeanne, with no money but her wages at a
pasteboard-box factory, directs the household, brings up the children, and
successfully maintains the family of eight, which thus subsists, morally as
well as materially, by the sole force of her valiant will. In some of these
French cases charity to outsiders is added to the inner family burden; or
helpless relatives, young or old, are adopted, as if the strength were
inexhaustible and ample for every appeal. Details are too long to quote here;
but human nature, responding to the call of duty, appears nowhere sublimer
than in the person of these humble heroines of family life.

## Buried Coal Miner's Great Achievement 

Turning from more chronic to acuter proofs of human nature's reserves of power,
we find that the stimuli that carry us over the usually effective dam are most
often the classic emotional ones, love, anger, crowd-contagion or despair.
Despair lames most people, but it wakes others fully up. Every siege or
shipwreck or polar expedi- tion brings out some hero who keeps the whole
company in heart. Last year there was a terrible colliery explosion at
Courrieres in France. Two hundred corpses, if I remember rightly, were
exhumed. After twenty days of excavation, the rescuers heard a voice. "Me
voici," said the first man unearthed. He proved to be a collier named Nemy,
who had taken command of thirteen others in the darkness, disciplined them and
cheered them, and brought them out alive. Hardly any of them could see or
speak or walk when brought into the day. Five days later, a different type of
vital endurance was unexpectedly unburied in the person of one Berton who,
isolated from any but dead companions, had been able to sleep away most of his
time.

## How a Soldier Survived an Awful Siege. 

A new position of responsibility will usually show a man to be a far stronger
creature than was supposed. Cromwell's and Grant's careers are the stock
examples of how war will wake a man up. I owe to Professor C. E. Norton, my
colleague, the permission to print part of a private letter from Colonel
Baird-Smith, written shortly after the six weeks' siege of Delhi, in 1857, for
the victorious issue of which that excellent officer was chiefly to be
thanked. He writes as follows:

> ... My poor wife had some reason to think that war and disease between them
> had left very little of a husband to take under nursing when she got him
> again. An attack of camp scurvy had filled my mouth with sores, shaken every
> joint in my body, and covered me all over with sores and livid spots, so
> that I was marvelously unlovely to look upon. A smart knock on the
> ankle-joint from the splinter of a shell that burst in my face, in itself a
> mere bagatelle of a wound, had been of necessity neglected under the
> pressing and incessant calls upon me, and had grown worse and worse till the
> whole foot below the ankle became a black mass and seemed to threaten
> mortification. I insisted, however, on being allowed to use it till the
> place was taken, mortification or no; and though the pain was sometimes
> horrible, I carried my point and kept up to the last. On the day after the
> assault I had an unlucky fall on some bad ground, and it was an open
> question for a day or two whether I hadn't broken my arm at the elbow.
> Fortunately it turned out to be only a severe sprain, but I am still
> conscious of the wrench it gave me. To crown the whole pleasant catalogue, I
> was worn to a shadow by a constant diarrhoea, and consumed as much opium as
> would have done credit to my father-in-law (Thomas De Quincey) . However,
> thank God, I have a good share of Tapleyism in me and come out strong under
> difficulties. I think I may confidently say that no man ever saw me out of
> heart, or ever heard one croaking word from me even when our prospects were
> gloomiest. We were sadly scourged by the cholera, and it was almost
> appalling to me to find that out of twenty-seven officers present, I could
> only muster fifteen for the operations of the attack. However, it was done,
> and after it was done came the collapse. Don't be horrified when I tell you
> that for the whole of the actual siege, and in truth for some little time
> before, I almost lived on brandy. Appetite for food I had none, but I forced
> myself to eat just sufficient to sustain life, and I had an incessant
> craving for brandy as the strongest stimulant I could get. Strange to say, I
> was quite unconscious of its affecting me in the slightest degree. _The
> excitement of the work was so great that no lesser one seemed to have any
> chance against it, and I certainly never found my intellect clearer or my
> nerves stronger in my life._ It was only my wretched body that was weak, and
> the moment the real work was done by our becoming complete masters of Delhi,
> I broke down without delay and discovered that if I wished to live I must
> continue no longer the system that had kept me up until the crisis was
> passed. With it passed away as if in a moment all desire to stimulate, and a
> perfect loathing of my late staff of life took possession of me.

Such experiences show how profound is the alteration in the manner in which,
under excitement, our organism will sometimes perform its physiological work.
The processes of repair become different when the reserves have to be used,
and for weeks and months the deeper use may go on.

##Morbid Cases of Women. 

Morbid cases, here as elsewhere, lay the normal machinery bare. In the first
number of Dr. Morton Prince's _Journal of Abnormal Psychology_, Dr. Janet has
discussed five cases of morbid impulse, with an explanation that is precious
for my present point of view. One is a girl who eats, eats, eats, all day.
Another walks, walks, walks, and gets her food from an automobile that escorts
her. Another is a dipsomaniac. A fourth pulls out her hair. A fifth wounds her
flesh and burns her skin. Hitherto such freaks of impulse have received Greek
names (as bulimia, dromomania, etc.) and been scientifically disposed of as
"episodic syndromata of hereditary degeneration." But it turns out that
Janet's cases are all what he calls psychasthenics, or victims of a chronic
sense of weakness, torpor, lethargy, fatigue, insufficiency, impossibility,
unreality, and powerlessness of will; and that in each and all of them the
particular activity pursued, deleterious though it be, has the temporary
result of raising the sense of vitality and making the patient feel alive
again. These things reanimate: they would reanimate _us_; but it happens that in
each patient the particular freak-activity chosen is the only thing that does
reanimate; and therein lies the morbid state. The way to treat such persons is
to discover to them more usual and useful ways of throwing their stores of
vital energy into gear.

## Is a "Spree" Ever Good for You? 

Colonel Baird-Smith, needing to draw on altogether extraordinary stores of
energy, found that brandy and opium were ways of throwing them into gear.

Such cases are humanly typical. We are all to some degree oppressed, unfree. We
don't come to our own. It is there, but we don't get at it. The threshold must
be made to shift. Then many of us find that an eccentric activity — a "spree,"
say — relieves. There is no doubt that to some men sprees and excesses of
almost any kind are medicinal, temporarily at any rate, in spite of what the
moralists and doctors say.

But when the normal tasks and stimulations of life don't put a man's deeper
levels of energy on tap, and he requires distinctly deleterious excitements,
his constitution verges on the abnormal. The normal opener of deeper and
deeper levels of energy is the will. The difficulty is to use it, to make the
effort which the word volition implies. But if we _do_ make it (or if a god,
though he were only the god Chance, makes it through us), it will act
dynamogenically on us for month. It is notorious that a single successful
effort of moral volition, such as saying "no" to some habitual temptation, or
performing some courageous act, will launch a man on a higher level of energy
for days and weeks, will give him a new range of power. "In the act of
uncorking the whiskey bottle which I had brought home to get drunk upon," said
a man to me, "I suddenly found myself running out into the garden, where I
smashed it on the ground. I felt so happy and uplifted after this act, that
for two months I wasn't tempted to touch a drop."

The emotions and excitements due to usual situations are the usual inciters of
the will. But these act discontinuously; and in the intervals the shallower
levels of life tend to close in and shut us off. Accordingly the best
practical knowers of the human soul have invented the thing known as
methodical ascetic discipline to keep the deeper levels constantly in reach.
Beginning with easy tasks, passing to harder ones, and exercising day by day,
it is, I believe, admitted that disciples of asceticism can reach very high
levels of freedom and power of will.

## Wonders of the Yoga System. 

Ignatius Loyola's spiritual exercises must have produced this result in
innumerable devotees. But the most venerable ascetic system, and the one whose
results have the most voluminous experimental corroboration is undoubtedly the
Yoga system in Hindustan. From time immemorial, by Hatha Yoga, Raja Yoga,
Karma Yoga, or whatever code of practise it might be, Hindu aspirants to
perfection have trained themselves, month in and out, for years. The result
claimed, and certainly in many cases accorded by impartial judges, is strength
of character, pesonal power, unshakability of soul. In an article in the
_Philosophical Review_ for January last, from which I am largely copying here, I
have quoted at great length the experience with "Hatha Yoga" of a very gifted
European friend of mine who, by persistently carrying out for several months
its methods of fasting from food and sleep, its exercises in breathing and
thought-concentration, and its fantastic posture-gymnastics, seems to have
succeeded in waking up deeper and deeper levels of will and moral and
intellectual power in himself, and to have escaped from a decidedly menacing
brain-condition of the "circular" type, from which he had suffered for years.

Judging by my friend's letters, of which the last I have is written fourteen
months after the Yoga training began, there can be no doubt of his relative
regeneration. He has undergone material trials with indifference, traveled
third-class on Mediterranean steamers, and fourth-class on African trains,
living with the poorest Arabs and sharing their unaccustomed food, all with
equanimity. His devotion to certain interests has been put to heavy strain,
and nothing is more remarkable to me than the changed moral tone with which he
reports the situation. A profound modification has unquestionably occurred in
the running of his mental machinery. The gearing has changed, and his will is
available otherwise than it was.

My friend is a man of very peculiar temperament. Few of us would have had the
will to start upon the Yoga training, which, once started, seemed to conjure
the further will-power needed out of itself. And not all of those who could
launch themselves would have reached the same results. The Hindus themselves
admit that in some men the results may come without call or bell. My friend
writes to me: "You are quite right in thinking that religious crises,
love-crises, indignation-crises may awaken in a very short time powers similar
to those reached by years of patient Yoga-practice."

Probably most medical men would treat this individual's case as one of what it
is fashionable now to call by the name of "self-suggestion" or "expectant
attention" — as if those phrases were explanatory, or meant more than the fact
that certain men can be influenced, while others cannot be influenced, by
certain sorts of _ideas_. This leads me to say a word about ideas considered as
dynamogenic agents, or stimuli for unlocking what would otherwise be unused
reservoirs of individual power.

One thing that ideas do is to contradict other ideas and keep us from believing
them. An idea that thus negates a first idea may itself in turn be negated by
a third idea, and the first idea may thus regain its natural influence over
our belief and determine our behavior. Our philosophic and religious
development proceeds thus by credulities, negations, and the negating of
negations.

## Ideas Which Unlock Our Hidden Energies. 

But whether for arousing or for stopping belief, ideas may fail to be
efficacious, just as a wire at one time alive with electricity, may at another
time be dead. Here our insight into causes fails us, and we can only note
results in general terms. In general, whether a given idea shall be a live
idea depends more on the person into whose mind it is injected than on the
idea itself. Which is the suggestive idea for this person, and which for that
one? Mr. Fletcher's disciples regenerate themselves by the idea (and the fact)
that they are chewing, and re-chewing, and super-chewing their food. Dr.
Dewey's pupils regenerate themselves by going without their breakfast — a
fact, but also an ascetic idea. Not every one can use _these_ ideas with the
same success.

But apart from such individually varying susceptibilities, there are common
lines along which men simply as men tend to be inflammable by ideas. As
certain objects naturally awaken love, anger, or cupidity, so certain ideas
naturally awaken the energies of loyalty, courage, endurance, or devotion.
When these ideas are effective in an individual's life, their effect is often
very great indeed. They may transfigure it, unlocking innumerable powers
which, but for the idea, would never have come into play. "Fatherland," "the
Flag," "the Union," "Holy Church," "the Monroe Doctrine," "Truth," "Science,"
"Liberty," Garibaldi's phrase "Rome or Death," etc., are so many examples of
energy-releasing ideas. The social nature of such phrases is an essential
factor of their dynamic power. They are forces of detent in situations in
which no other force produces equivalent effects, and each is a force of
detent only in a specific group of men.

## The Power in a Temperance "Pledge" 

The memory that an oath or vow has been made will nerve one to abstinences and
efforts otherwise impossible; witness the "pledge" in the history of the
temperance movement. A mere promise to his sweetheart will clean up a youth's
life all over — at any rate for a time. For such effects an educated
susceptibility is required. The idea of one's "honor," for example, unlocks
energy only in those of us who have had the education of a "gentleman," so
called.

That delightful being, Prince Pueckler-Muskau, writes to his wife from England
that he has invented "a sort of artificial resolution respecting things that
are difficult of performance. My device," he continues, "is this:" 

> _I give my word of honor most solemnly to myself_ to do or to leave undone
> this or that. I am of course extremely cautious in the use of this
> expedient, but when once the word is given, even though I afterwards think I
> have been precipitate or mistaken, I hold it to be perfectly irrevocable,
> whatever inconveniences I foresee likely to result. If I were capable of
> breaking my word after such mature consideration, I should lose all respect
> for myself, — and what man of sense would not prefer death to such an
> alternative? . . . When the mysterious formula is pronounced, no alteration
> in my own view nothing short of physical impossibilities, must, for the
> welfare of my soul, alter my will. ... I find something very satisfactory in
> the thought that man has the power of framing such props and weapons out of
> the most trivial materials, indeed out of nothing, merely by the force of
> his will, which thereby truly deserves the name of omnipotent.*

* "Tour in England, Ireland and France," Philadelphia, 1833, p. 435. 

_Conversions_, whether they be political, scien- tific, philosophic, or
religious, form another way in which bound energies are let loose. They unify
us, and put a stop to ancient mental interfer- ences. The result is freedom,
and often a great enlargement of power. A belief that thus settles upon an
individual always acts as a challenge to his will. But, for the particular
challenge to op- erate, he must be the right challenge. In re- ligious
conversions we have so fine an adjustment that the idea may be in the mind of
the challengee for years before it exerts effects; and why it should do so
then is often so far from obvious that the event is taken for a miracle of
grace, and not a natural occurrence. Whatever it is, it may be a highwater
mark of energy, in which "noes," once impossible, are easy, and in which a new
range of "yeses " gains the right of way.

## The Value of Christian Science. 

We are just now witnessing a very copious unlocking of energies by ideas in the
persons of those converts to "New Thought," "Christian Science," "Metaphysical
Healing," or other forms of spiritual philosophy, who are so numerous among us
to-day. The ideas here are healthy-minded and optimistic; and it is quite
obvious that a wave of religious activity, analogous in some respects to the
spread of early Christianity, Buddhism, and Mohammedanism, is passing over our
American world. The common feature of these optimistic faiths is that they all
tend to the suppression of what Mr. Horace Fletcher calls "fearthought."
Fearthought he defines as the "self-suggestion of inferiority"; so that one
may say that these systems all operate by the suggestion of power. And the
power, small or great, comes in various shapes to the individual, — power, as
he will tell you, not to "mind" things that used to vex him, power to
concentrate his mind, good cheer, good temper — in short, to put it mildly, a
firmer, more elastic moral tone.

The most genuinely saintly person I have ever known is a friend of mine now
suffering from cancer of the breast — I hope that she may pardon my citing her
her as an example of what ideas can do. Her ideas have kept her a practically
well woman for months after she should have given up and gone to bed. They
have annulled all pain and weakness and given her a cheerful active life,
unusually beneficent to others to whom she has afforded help. Her doctors,
acquiescing in results they could not understand, have had the good sense to
let her go her own way.

How far the mind-cure movement is destined to extend its influence, or what
intellectual modifications it may yet undergo, no one can foretell. It is
essentially a religious movement, and to academically nurtured minds its
utterances are tasteless and often grotesque enough. It also incurs the
natural enmity of medical politicians, and of the whole trades-union wing of
that profession. But no unprejudiced observer can fail to recognize its
importance as a social phenomenon to-day, and the higher medical minds are
already trying to interpret it fairly, and make its power available for their
own therapeutic ends.

## Prayer as a Sleep-Producer. 

Dr. Thomas Hyslop, of the great West Rid- ing Asylum in England, said last year
to the British Medical Association that the best sleep- producing agent which
his practice had revealed to him, was _prayer_. I say this, he added (I am sorry
here that I must quote from memory), purely as a medical man. The exercise of
prayer, in those who habitually exert it, must be regarded by us doctors as
the most adequate and normal of all the pacifiers of the mind and calmers of
the nerves.

But in few of us are functions not tied up by the exercise of other functions.
Relatively few medical men and scientific men, I fancy, can pray. Few can
carry on any living commerce with "God." Yet many of us are well aware of how
much freer and abler our lives would be, were such important forms of
energizing not sealed up by the critical atmosphere in which we have been
reared. There are in every one potential forms of activity that actually are
shunted out from use. Part of the imperfect vitality under which we labor can
thus be easily explained. One part of our mind dams up — even damns up! — the
other parts.

## Trying to Work with One Finger. 

Conscience makes cowards of us all. Social conventions prevent us from telling
the truth after the fashion of the heroes and heroines of Bernard Shaw. We all
know persons who are models of excellence, but who belong to the extreme
philistine type of mind. So deadly is their intellectual respectability that
we can't converse about certain subjects at all, can't let our minds play over
them, can't even mention them in their presence. I have numbered among my
dearest friends persons thus inhibited intellectually, with whom I would
gladly have been able to talk freely about certain interests of mine, certain
authors, say, as Bernard Shaw, Chesterton, Edward Carpenter, H. G. Wells, but
it wouldn't do, it made them too uncomfortable, they wouldn't play, I had to
be silent. An intellect thus tied down by literality and decorum makes on one
the same sort of an impression that an able-bodied man would who should
habituate himself to do his work with only one of his fingers, locking up the
rest of his organism and leaving it unused.

I trust that by this time I have said enough to convince the reader both of the
truth and of the importance of my thesis. The two questions, first, that of
the possible extent of our powers; and, second, that of the various avenues of
approach to them, the various keys for unlocking them in diverse individuals,
dominate the whole problem of individual and national education. We need a
topography of the limits of human power, similar to the chart which oculists
use of the field of human vision. We need also a study of the various types of
human being with reference to the different ways in which their
energy-reserves may be appealed to and set loose. Biographies and individual
experiences of every kind may be drawn upon for evidence here.
